Question:  What is a  Bill?
Answer: A Bill is the draft of a legislative proposal brought before the House for its approval.
Question:  What are the different types of Bills?
Answer: Bills initiated by Ministers are called Government Bills and those introduced by Members who are not Ministers are known as Private Members' Bills. Depending on their contents, Bills may further be classified broadly into (a)  Original Bills (Bills embodying new proposals, ideas or policies); (b) Amending Bills (Bills which seek to modify, amend or revise the existing Acts); (c) Consolidating Bills (Bills which seek to consolidate existing laws on a particular subject;  (d) Expiring Laws (Continuance) Bills (Bills to continue an expiring Act); (e) Repealing Bills (Bills seeking to repeal existing Acts); (f) Bills to replace Ordinances; (g) Constitution (Amendment) Bills; and (h) Money and Financial Bills.
Question:  Who decides whether a Bill is an ordinary Bill or a Money Bill?
Answer: In case any question arises whether a Bill is a Money Bill or not, the decision of the Speaker, Lok Sabha, thereon, is final.  When a Bill is held to be a Money Bill, the Speaker endorses a certificate thereon duly signed by the Speaker to that effect that it is a Money Bill before the Bill is sent to the Rajya Sabha or presented to the President for assent.
Question:  What is the difference between a Bill and an Act?
Answer: A Bill is a draft legislative proposal before the House.  It becomes an Act only when passed by both the Houses of Parliament and assented to by the President.
Question:  What are the various steps involved in the passage of a Bill?
Answer: A Bill while being considered has to undergo three stages in each House of Parliament. The first stage consists of the introduction of the Bill which is done on a motion moved by either a Minister or a Member.
Question:  What is Budget?
Answer: Budget is the `Annual Financial Statement'  or the Statement of the Estimated Receipts and Expenditure of the Government of India in respect of each financial year, presented to the Lok Sabha on such day as the President may direct.  A copy of the Budget is laid in the Rajya Sabha soon after its presentation in the Lok Sabha.  The preparation and presentation of the Budget for the approval of the Legislature is a constitutional obligation on the part of the Government, both at the Centre and in the States.
Question:  When is the Budget Session of Parliament held?
Answer: The Budget Session of Parliament is normally held during February to May of the year.  During this period, the  Budget comes before the Parliament for its deliberation, voting and approval; the Departmentally related Standing Committees consider the Demands for Grants of Ministries/Departments and report on the same to the Houses of Parliament.
Question:  Who presents the Budget in the House?
Answer: During the second stage, any of the following motions can be moved: that the Bill be taken into consideration; that it be referred to a Select Committee of the House; that it be referred to a Joint Committee of the two Houses; or that it be circulated for the purpose of eliciting opinion thereon. Thereafter, the Bill is taken up for clause-by-clause consideration as introduced or as reported by the Select/Joint Committee. The third stage is confined to the discussion on the motion that the Bill be passed and the Bill is passed/rejected either by voting or voice vote (or returned to the Lok Sabha by the Rajya Sabha in the case of a Money Bill). In yet another significant development implemented from 2017 was the presentation of an integrated Budget, that is, the merger of the Railways Budget with the General Budget, thereby discontinuing a 92-year old practice of presentation of two separate budgets 