Question:  Who is the Presiding Officer of the Lok Sabha?
Answer: The Speaker and the Deputy Speaker are the Presiding Officers of the Lok Sabha.
Question:  What is the term of Office of the Speaker?
Answer: The Speaker continues in office till immediately before the first meeting of Lok Sabha after dissolution of the one to which he/she was elected, unless he/she ceases to be a Member by any of the reasons specified in articles 94, 101 and 102 of the Constitution.
Question:  Who presides over the Lok Sabha when the Speaker is absent from the sitting of the House?
Answer: The Deputy Speaker presides over the Lok Sabha when the Speaker is absent from the sitting of the House.
Question:  Who presides over the Lok Sabha when both the Speaker's and the Deputy Speaker's offices fall vacant?
Answer: When the Offices of both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker fall vacant, the duties of the Office of the Speaker are performed by such Member of the Lok Sabha as the President may appoint for the purpose. The person so appointed is known as the Speaker pro tem.
Question:  Who presides over the House in the absence of both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker?
Answer: The Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha provide that at the commencement of the House or from time to time, as the case may be, the Speaker shall nominate from amongst the Members a Panel of not more than ten Chairpersons, any one of whom may preside over the House in the absence of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker when so requested by the Speaker or, in the absence of the Speaker, by the Deputy Speaker.  A Chairperson so nominated, holds office until a new Panel of Chairpersons is nominated, unless he/she resigns earlier from the Panel or is appointed a Minister or elected as Deputy Speaker.
Question:  Who is the present Speaker of the Lok Sabha?
Answer: Shri Om Birla.
Question:  Who is the  present Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha?
Answer: Nil
Question:  Who is the Leader of the House in the Seventeenth Lok Sabha?
Answer: Shri  Narendra Damodardas Modi.
Question:  Who is the Leader of  the Opposition in the Seventeenth Lok Sabha?
Answer: No Leader of the Opposition has been recognised by the Hon’ble Speaker in the 17th Lok Sabha.
Question:  Who is the Secretary-General of the Lok Sabha?
Answer: 