Question:  What are the powers of Lok Sabha relating to Money Bills?
Answer: A Bill is deemed to be a 'Money Bill' if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the following matters: (a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax; (b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or giving of any guarantee by the Government of India,  or the amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by the Government of India; (c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of India, the payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys from any such Fund; (d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India; (e) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India or the increasing of the amount of any such expenditure; (f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of India or the public account of India or the custody or issue of such money or the audit of the accounts of the Union  or of a State; or (g) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) [Art.110].
Question: What is the legislative relationship between the  Lok Sabha and the  Rajya Sabha?
Answer: In legislative matters, both the Houses enjoy almost equal powers except in the case of Money Bills.   The main function of both the Houses is to pass laws.  Every Bill has to be passed by both the Houses and assented to by the President before it becomes law.  In case of Money Bills, the Lok Sabha has overriding powers.
Question:  Is any deadlock between the two Houses possible?
Answer: Yes. In the case of Bills other than Money Bills and Constitution Amendment Bills, a disagreement between the two Houses may arise when a Bill passed by one House is rejected by the other House; or the Houses have finally disagreed as to the amendments to be made in the Bill; or more than six months have elapsed from the date of receipt  of the Bill by the other House without the Bill being passed by it.
Question:  What is the mechanism for resolving such a deadlock between the two Houses?
Answer: A joint sitting of both Houses   is convened by the President for this purpose. [Article 108]
Question:  How many joint sittings of the Houses have been convened so far?
Answer: So far, joint sittings of the two Houses have taken place  on three occasions.  The first joint sitting was held on 6 May 1961 following a disagreement between the two Houses over certain amendments to the Dowry Prohibition Bill, 1959.  This was followed by another sitting on 9 May 1961 when the Bill, as amended, was finally passed.  The second joint sitting was held on 16 May 1978, following the rejection by the Rajya Sabha of the Banking Service Commission (Repeal) Bill, 1977 and the Bill was passed.  The third joint sitting was held on 26 March 2002 when the motion to consider the  Prevention of Terrorism Bill, 2002, seeking to replace the Prevention of Terrorism Ordinance (POTO) as passed by the Lok Sabha was rejected by the Rajya Sabha.  At this sitting held for the purpose of deliberating and voting on the Prevention of Terrorism Bill, 2002, the Bill was passed.
Question:  Who presides over the joint sitting of the two Houses?
Answer: The Speaker of the Lok Sabha presides over the joint sitting of the two Houses. [Article 118(4)]
Question:  Does the Speaker have the right to vote?
Answer: The Speaker has a casting vote in the event of a tie.  It is customary for the Presiding Officer to exercise the casting vote in such a manner as to maintain the status quo.
Question:  How many Sessions of the Lok Sabha are held in a year?
Answer: Normally three Sessions of the Lok Sabha are held in a year, viz.,
Question: What is meant by Adjournment, Prorogation and Dissolution of the Lok Sabha?
Answer: "Adjournment" is a postponement of the sitting or proceedings of the House from one time to another specified for the reassembling of the House.  During the course of a Session, the Lok Sabha may be adjourned from day to day or for more than a day.  It may also be adjourned    sine die which means the termination of a sitting of the House without any definite date being fixed for its next sitting.
Question:  What are the methods of voting in the Lok Sabha?
Answer: Rule32 of the “Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha” provides that unless the Speaker otherwise directs, the first hour of every sitting of the House shall be available for the asking and answering of Questions. Thus, it is taken up from 1100hrs to 1200 hrs in every sitting. Normally, there is no Question Hour during the first Session of the new Lok Sabha and also on the day when the President addresses both houses assembled together or on the day when General Budget is presented in Lok Sabha and on the sittings held during the extended period of session or on Saturdays/Sundays and Holidays.
Question:  What is a Parliamentary Question?
Answer: Question is one of the important Parliamentary devices available to the Members to seek information on a matter of urgent public importance subject to conditions imposed by the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha and the Directions by the Speaker. A Member may ask question for the purpose of obtaining information on a subject matter of public importance within the special cognizance of the minister to whom it is addressed.
Question:  What are the different types of Questions?
Answer: There are basically four types of Questions:-
Question:  What is the maximum number of Questions admitted for a particular day?
Answer: The maximum number of Questions to be placed on the list of Questions for oral answers (Starred Question) on a particular day is 20, while the maximum number of questions to be placed on the list of Unstarred Question is 230. However, the number of Unstarred Questions may exceed by a maximum of 25 Questions pertaining to State/States under President’s Rule.
Question:  Whether there is any restriction regarding the number of notices  that each Member may give with regard to Questions?
Answer: A Member is permitted to give not more than 10 notices of Questions both Starred and Unstarred combined for any day. But not more than five admitted questions, both Starred and Unstarred combined, by one Member are placed on the list of questions for any one day. Out of these 5 questions, not more than one Question distinguished by the Member with asterisk* as Starred is placed on the list of Questions for oral answer. This limit of one question for oral answer does not include any Short Notice Question of the Member which may have been admitted for answer on that day. However, a Member can have more than one Starred question in the list in the event of transfer or postponement of Questions in the printed list from one day to another.
Question:  Who decides the admissibility of Questions?
Answer: Admissibility of questions is governed by Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, Directions by the Speaker as also the past precedents. The Speaker, Lok Sabha, decides whether a question or a part thereof, is or is not admissible under the Rules, and may disallow any question, or a part thereof, when in his/her opinion, it is an abuse of the right of questioning or is calculated to obstruct or prejudicially affect the procedure of the House or is in contravention of the Rules. The right to ask a question is governed by certain conditions like it should be pointed, specific and confined to one issue only. It should not contain arguments, inferences, ironical expressions, imputations, epithets or defamatory statements.
Question:  What is an Half-an-Hour Discussion?
Answer: Another instrument available to the Members of Lok Sabha for raising issue of public importance is the Half-an-Hour Discussion. Under this, a Member may raise discussion on a matter of sufficient public importance which has been the subject of a recent question, Starred, Unstarred or Short Notice Question and the answer to which needs further elucidation on a matter of fact.
Question:  What is the procedure for Half-an-Hour Discussion?
Answer: The procedure regarding Half-an-Hour Discussion is regulated by Rule 55 of the ‘Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha’ and Direction 19 of the ‘Directions by the Speaker’. Under this, a Member may give notice to raise a discussion on a matter of sufficient public importance and which has been the subject of a recent question, Starred, Unstarred or Short Notice Question, and the answer to which needs further elucidation on a matter of fact. A notice is also required to be accompanied by an ‘Explanatory Note’ stating the reasons for raising the discussion and should also be signed. Normally, only one notice of Half-an-Hour Discussion is put down for a sitting and no formal motion is moved in the House nor does voting take place. The Member who has given notice makes a short statement and the Members who have previously intimated the Speaker and have secured one of the four places in the ballot are permitted to put a question each for the purpose of further elucidating any matter of fact. Thereafter, the Minister concerned replies briefly.
Question:  When a Half-an-Hour Discussion is taken up?
Answer: A Money Bill can be introduced only in the Lok Sabha.  The Rajya Sabha cannot make amendments in a Money Bill passed by the Lok Sabha and transmitted to it.  It can, however, recommend amendments in a Money Bill.  It is open to the Lok Sabha to accept or reject any or all of the recommendations of  the Rajya Sabha with regard to a Money Bill.  If the Lok Sabha accepts any of the recommendations of the  Rajya Sabha, the Money Bill is deemed to have been passed by both Houses with amendments recommended by the Rajya Sabha and accepted by the Lok Sabha and if the Lok Sabha does not accept any of the recommendations of the Rajya Sabha, the Money Bill is deemed to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the  Lok Sabha without any of the amendments recommended by the  Rajya Sabha.  If a Money Bill  passed by  the Lok Sabha and transmitted to the Rajya Sabha  is not returned to the Lok Sabha within the period of fourteen days, it is deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the expiration of the said period in the form in which it was passed by the Lok Sabha. Â·         Budget Session                              -  February - May Â·         Autumn or Monsoon Session           -  July - August Â·         Winter Session                               -  November - December "Prorogation" means the termination of a Session of the House by an order made by the  President under article 85(2)(a) of the Constitution.  The Prorogation of the House may take place any time, even while the House is sitting.  However, usually, prorogation follows the adjournment of the sitting of the House sine die. "Dissolution" of the House means the end of the life of the Lok Sabha either by an order made by the  President under article 85 (2) (b) of the Constitution or on the expiration of the period of five years from the date appointed for its first meeting. Dissolution puts an end to the representative character of the individuals who at the time compose the Lok Sabha. On adjournment of the Lok Sabha or its adjournment sine die, the pending business does not lapse.  Bills pending before either House or Select/Joint Committee, Motions, Resolutions, and amendments which have already been moved and pending in the House, and business pending before a Parliamentary Committee do not lapse on prorogation whereas all business pending before the House or any of its Committee lapse on dissolution.  Prorogation terminates a Session and does not constitute an interruption in the continuity of life of the Lok Sabha which is brought to an end only by dissolution. (i)        Voice Vote:  It is a simple method for deciding a question put by the Chair on a motion made by  a Member.  Under this method, the question before the House is determined by the `Ayes' or the `Noes', as the case may be. (ii)         Division:  There are three methods of holding a Division, i.e.  (a) by operating the Automatic Vote Recording Equipment; (b) by distributing `Ayes' and `Noes' slips in the House; and (c) by Members going into the Lobbies.  However, the method of recording of votes in the Lobbies has become obsolete ever since the installation of the Automatic Vote Recording Machine. (iii)        Secret Ballot:  During an 'open' voting period, the individual results are shown by the three Colours: Green for ‘Ayes’, Red for ‘Noes’ and Yellow for ‘Abstain’ on the Individual Result Display Panel. Secret  voting, if any, is held on similar lines except that the Light Emitting Diode (LED) on the Individual Result Display Panel flashes only white light to show that the vote has been recorded. (iv)         Recording of votes by distribution of slips:  The method of recording of votes by Members on `Ayes' and `Noes' slips is generally resorted to in the eventuality of (i) sudden failure of the working of the Automatic Vote Recording Equipment; and (ii) at the commencement of the new Lok Sabha, before the seats/division numbers have been allotted to Members. (v)           Physical count of Members in their places instead of a formal division:  If in the opinion of the Chair, a Division is unnecessarily claimed, he/she may ask the Members who are for `Ayes' and those for `Noes', respectively, to rise in their places and on a count being taken, he/she may declare the determination of the House.  In such a case, the particulars of voting of the Members are not recorded. (vi)         Casting Vote:  If in a Division the number of `Ayes' and `Noes' is equal, the question is decided by the casting vote of the Chair.  Under the Constitution, the Speaker or the person acting as such cannot vote in a Division; he/she has only a casting vote which he/she must exercise in the case of equality of votes. Question 42: What is Question Hour? Starred: A Member who desires an oral answer to his question is required to distinguish it by an asterix. Maximum 20 Questions are included in the list of Starred Questions for a particular day. This is printed on green paper. Minimum of 15 clear days notice is required for tabling Starred Questions. The Questions not orally answered in the Starred list of questions are treated as Unstarred Questions and their replies are laid on the Table of the House. Unstarred: These do not carry the asterix mark and are meant for obtaining written reply. Not more than 230 Questions can be placed on the Unstarred list for a particular sitting. This list is printed on white paper. Minimum 15 clear days notice is required for tabling Unstarred Questions. Written answers given by the Ministers are deemed to have been laid on the Table of the House at the end of Question Hour. Short Notice Question: Question can also be asked on a matter of urgent public importance at a notice of less than ten clear days. The list of admitted SNQ is printed on a pink paper. The procedure of SNQ is regulated by Rule 54 and the basic test for its admissibility is the urgency of matter. SNQ is asked and answered soon after the Question Hour. Question to Private Members: A Question may also be addressed to a Private Member under Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, which provides that the subject matter of the question should be related to some Bill, Resolution or other matter connected with the Business of the House for which that Member is responsible. For instance, the Questions which relates to matters under the purview of Parliamentary Committees can be addressed to respective Chairperson. Similarly, Members piloting Private Members Bills and Resolutions can be addressed questions, which are within cognizance of them under this provision. The procedure in regard to such questions is the same as that followed in the case of questions addressed to a Minister with such variations as the Speaker may consider necessary. 